h1. Proposal: validation error messages in ActiveModel

(requires I18n current master)

This stuff is a very rough draft of how I propose to deal with validation
error messages (and potentially other usecases that need I18n support, such as
form labels).

It might go into Rails or end up in some plugin or gem.

I'm not looking so much at the actual integration to ActiveModel, yet. So far
I'm just trying to sketch out the underlying stuff so that it covers all
requirements in a consistent way.

I want this stuff to be re-usable in other places where similar patterns occur
when it comes to I18n, such as form labels and potentially other stuff.

h2. Problems solved

* Strings in class method calls are treated as plain text by default
  (users might optionally want to treat them as translation keys for
  gettext-style class method calls).
* Symbols in class method calls are treated as translation keys.
* Use messages from class method calls consistently with translation keys that
  are implicitly used for a particular validation.
* Different translation variants (such as :full_message) for the same message
  must be possible.
* Translation calls should optionally be able to cascade over scopes.
* Support format strings, e.g. "{{attribute}} {{message}}", transparently

h2. Classes

There currently are three classes defined in the global namespace (mostly a
problem of picking good names and places).

The Message class is the main base class that's supposed to work (as a common
base class) in several situations such as error messages, form labels etc.

The Error class is the meant to work as a default Error class in ActiveModel.

The Format class is used internally to format other messages (see below).

h2. Features

The Message class comes with six modules that each provide a single feature.
This way everything's completely optional and pluggable (thus extensible and
easy to customize) even though we might choose to not impose this complexity
on the enduser (and maybe pick a default configuration/provide a configuration
dsl instead).

h3. Base

This module just takes a String message and interpolation values. Calling #to_s
will interpolate the values and return the String. The module is organized in
a way so that other modules can hook in easily.

h3. Translated

This module will translate messages that are Symbols.

h3. Gettext

This module will also translate messages that are Strings. This behavior is
frequently asked for by people who want to use Gettext-style translation keys
in class-level calls: validates_presence_of :foo, :message => 'The message'

h3. Variants

This module adds the ability to specify Hashes as messages both at class-level
and in translation data. E.g.:

  validates_presence_of :foo, :message => { :short => 'Short!', :full => 'The full message!' }

Calling #to_s on the Message instance will take a variant key and try to find
and use the variant. It defaults to the :short variant.

h3. Formatted

This module adds the ability to specify format strings for messages both at
class-level and in translation data. E.g.:

  validates_presence_of :foo, :format => 'The formatted {{message}}.'

This module also works in combination with the Variants module in the way one
would expect:

  validates_presence_of :foo, :message => { :short => 'foo', :full => 'FOO' }
                              :format  => { :full => 'The formatted {{message}}.' }

message.to_s(:full) would then wrap the :full message 'FOO' into the :full
format string and yield 'The formatted FOO'. message.to_s (defaults to :short)
would just yield 'foo' as expected.

